Parkinson's disease (PD), or simply Parkinson's, is a neurodegenerative disease primarily of the central nervous system, affecting both motor and non-motor systems. The motor symptoms, collectively called parkinsonism, include tremors, slowness in initiating movement (bradykinesia), rigidity, and difficulty maintaining balance (postural instability). Non-motor symptoms such as autonomic nervous system failures (dysautonomia), sleep abnormalities, decreased ability to smell (anosmia), and behavioral changes or neuropsychiatric problems, such as cognitive impairment, psychosis, and anxiety, may appear at any stage of the disease. Symptoms typically develop gradually and non-motor issues become more prevalent as the disease progresses. Parkinson's disease has no single cause: rather, genetic and environmental factors interact to affect critical cellular processes. Parkinson's disease involves the gradual decay and loss of dopamine-producing neurons in a brain region called the substantia nigra and other related cell groups in the brainstem. Misfolded proteins, such as alpha-synuclein, aggregate to form clumps called Lewy bodies, if not cleared from cells by cellular degradation systems. Protein accumulation stimulates the release of pro-inflammatory molecules by the microglia, a protective response that can cause neuroinflammation, further neuronal damage, and disruption of metabolic systems, if remaining chronic. Diagnosis is primarily based on signs and symptoms, typically motor-related, identified through neurological examination. Medical imaging techniques such as PET scanning can support the diagnosis. PD typically manifests in individuals over 60, with about one percent affected. In those younger than 50, the condition is termed "early-onset PD". No cure for PD is known, and treatment focuses on alleviating symptoms. Initial treatment typically includes levodopa, MAO-B inhibitors, or dopamine agonists. As the disease progresses, these medications become less effective and may cause involuntary muscle movements. Diet and rehabilitation therapies can help improve symptoms. Deep brain stimulation is used to manage severe motor symptoms when drugs are ineffective. Little evidence exists for treatments addressing non-motor symptoms, such as sleep disturbances and mood instability. Life expectancy for those with PD is near-normal, but is decreased for early-onset. == Classification and terminology == Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disease affecting both the central and peripheral nervous systems, characterized by the loss of dopamine-producing neurons in the substantia nigra region of the brain. It is classified as a synucleinopathy due to the abnormal accumulation of the protein alpha-synuclein, which aggregates into Lewy bodies within affected neurons. The loss of dopamine-producing neurons in the substantia nigra causes movement abnormalities, leading to the categorization of Parkinson's as a movement disorder. In 30% of those with PD, disease progression leads to cognitive decline, resulting in Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). Alongside dementia with Lewy bodies, PDD is one of the two subtypes of Lewy body dementia. The four cardinal motor symptoms of Parkinson's—slowed movements (bradykinesia), postural instability, rigidity, and tremor—are called parkinsonism. Parkinsonism is not exclusive to Parkinson's disease and can occur in other conditions, including HIV infection and recreational drug use. Neurodegenerative diseases that feature parkinsonism, but have distinct differences are grouped under the umbrella of Parkinson-plus syndromes, or alternatively, atypical parkinsonian disorders. == Signs and symptoms == === Motor === The cardinal motor features are tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability, collectively termed parkinsonism. Appearing in 70–75% of those with PD, tremor is often the predominant motor symptom. Resting tremor is the most common, but kinetic tremors—occurring during voluntary movements—and postural tremor—preventing upright, stable posture—also occur. Tremor largely affects the hands and feet: a classic parkinsonian tremor is "pill-rolling", a resting tremor in which the thumb and index finger make contact in a circular motion at 4–6 Hz frequency. Bradykinesia describes difficulties in motor planning, beginning, and executing, resulting in overall slowed movement with reduced amplitude that affects sequential and simultaneous tasks. Bradykinesia can also lead to hypomimia, reduced facial expressions. Rigidity, also called rigor, refers to a feeling of stiffness and resistance to passive stretching of muscles. Postural instability typically appears in later stages, leading to impaired balance and falls. Postural instability also leads to a forward stooping posture. Beyond the cardinal four, other motor deficits, termed secondary motor symptoms, commonly occur. Notably, gait disturbances result in the parkinsonian gait, which includes shuffling and paroxysmal deficits, where a normal gait is interrupted by rapid footsteps—known as festination—or sudden stops, impairing balance and causing falls. Most people with PD experience speech problems, including stuttering, hypophonic, "soft" speech, slurring, and festinating speech (rapid and poorly intelligible). Handwriting is commonly altered in PD, decreasing in size—known as micrographia—and becoming jagged and sharply fluctuating. Grip and dexterity are also impaired. === Neuropsychiatric and cognitive === Neuropsychiatric symptoms such as anxiety, apathy, depression, hallucination, and impulse control disorders occur in up to 60% of those with PD. They often precede motor symptoms, vary with disease progression, and may appear at any stage of the disease including the prodromal phase. Fluctuating symptoms including dysphoria (the opposite of euphoria), fatigue, and slowness of thought, are also common. Some neuropsychiatric symptoms are not directly caused by neurodegeneration, but rather by its pharmacological management. Cognitive impairments rank among the most prevalent and debilitating non-motor symptoms. These deficits may emerge in the early stages or before diagnosis, and their prevalence and severity tend to increase with disease progression. Ranging from mild cognitive impairment to severe Parkinson's disease dementia, these impairments include executive dysfunction, slowed cognitive processing speed, and disruptions in time perception and estimation. Evidence from a large systematic review and meta-analysis states that the well-recognized motor and non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease are associated with a decrease in quality of life (QOL) compared to healthy individuals. This research demonstrates that impairments are widespread and present at different levels across a population, with physical functioning showing major deficiencies and mental health showing moderate deficits. The findings suggest that non-motor symptoms, such as depression, anxiety, fatigue, and psychosocial dysfunction, may contribute more to lowering QOL than motor symptoms, highlighting the importance of addressing these factors by a clinician.The analysis also reveals that disease-specific assessment tools, such as the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire-39 (PDQ-39), detect QOL more accurately than generic instruments, suggesting that standard measures may not be suitable for the disease . === Autonomic === Autonomic nervous system failures, known as dysautonomia, can appear at any stage of PD. They are among the most debilitating symptoms and greatly reduce quality of life. Although almost all individuals with PD have cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction, only some are symptomatic. Chiefly, orthostatic hypotension—a sustained blood pressure drop of at least 20 mmHg systolic or 10 mmHg diastolic after standing—occurs in 30–50% of cases. This can result in lightheadedness or fainting; subsequent falls are associated with higher morbidity and mortality. Other autonomic failures include gastrointestinal issues such as chronic constipation, impaired stomach emptying and subsequent nausea, excessive salivation, and dysphagia (difficulty swallowing); all greatly reduce quality of life. Dysphagia, for instance, can prevent pill swallowing and lead to aspiration pneumonia. Urinary incontinence, sexual dysfunction, and thermoregulatory dysfunction—including heat and cold intolerance and excessive sweating—also frequently occur. === Other === Sensory deficits appear in up to 90% of people with PD and are usually present at early stages. Nociceptive and neuropathic pain are common, with peripheral neuropathy affecting up to 55% of individuals. Visual impairments are also frequently observed, including deficits in visual acuity, color vision, eye coordination, and visual hallucinations. An impaired sense of smell is also prevalent. Individuals often struggle with spatial awareness, recognizing faces and emotions, and may experience challenges with reading and double vision. Sleep disorders are highly prevalent in PD, affecting up to 98%. These disorders include insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness, restless legs syndrome, REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), and sleep-disordered breathing, many of which can be worsened by medication. RBD may begin years before the initial motor symptoms. Individual presentation of symptoms varies, although most people affected by PD show an altered circadian rhythm at some point of disease progression. PD is also associated with a variety of skin disorders that include melanoma, seborrheic dermatitis, bullous pemphigoid, and rosacea. Seborrheic dermatitis is recognized as a premotor feature that indicates dysautonomia and demonstrates that PD can be detected not only by changes of nervous tissue, but also tissue abnormalities outside the nervous system. == Causes == Parkinson's disease has no single cause: rather, genetic and environmental factors interact and affect critical cellular processes in a complex interplay. Parkinson's disease (PD) involves the gradual degeneration of dopamine producing neurons in a brain region called the substantia nigra and other related cell groups in the brainstem. This is accompanied by the accumulation of misfolded proteins such as alpha-synuclein. Alpha-synuclein is normally found in the presynaptic terminals of neurons. If alpha-synuclein is mis-folded and not cleared from cells by cellular degradation systems, it can build up to form clumps of proteins called Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. Accumulation stimulates the release of pro-inflammatory molecules by the microglia, a protective response that can cause inflammation and neuronal damage if it becomes chronic. Neuroinflammation causes the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to become more permeable, allowing dangerous substances and inflammatory cells to enter the brain and interfere with metabolic functions.