Malaria is a mosquito-borne infectious disease which is transmitted by the bite of Anopheles mosquitoes. Human malaria causes symptoms that typically include fever, fatigue, vomiting, and headaches; in severe cases, it can cause jaundice, seizures, coma, or death. Symptoms usually begin 10 to 15 days after being bitten by an infected Anopheles mosquito. If not properly treated, people may have recurrences of the disease months later. Those who survive an infection develop partial immunity, being susceptible to reinfection although with milder symptoms. This partial resistance disappears over months to years if the person has no continuing exposure to malaria. Malaria is caused by single-celled parasites of the genus Plasmodium, generally spread through the bites of an infected female Anopheles mosquito. The mosquito bite introduces the parasites from the mosquito's saliva into the blood. The parasites initially reproduce and mature in the liver without causing symptoms. After a few days the mature parasites spread into the bloodstream, where they infect and destroy red blood cells, causing the symptoms of infection. Five species of Plasmodium commonly infect humans. The three species associated with more severe cases are P. falciparum (which is responsible for the vast majority of malaria deaths), P. vivax, and P. knowlesi (a simian malaria that spills over into thousands of people a year). P. ovale and P. malariae generally cause a milder form of malaria. Malaria is typically diagnosed by the microscopic examination of blood using blood films, or with antigen-based rapid diagnostic tests. Methods that use the polymerase chain reaction to detect the parasite's DNA have been developed, but they are not widely used in areas where malaria is common, due to their cost and complexity. The risk of disease can be reduced by preventing mosquito bites through the use of mosquito nets and insect repellents or with mosquito-control measures such as spraying insecticides and draining standing water. Several prophylactic medications are available to prevent malaria in areas where the disease is common. As of 2023, two malaria vaccines have been endorsed by the World Health Organization. Resistance among the parasites has developed to several antimalarial medications; for example, chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum has spread to most malaria-prone areas, and resistance to artemisinin has become a problem in some parts of Southeast Asia. Because of this, drug treatment for malaria infection should be tailored to best fit the Plasmodium species involved and the geographical location where the infection was acquired. The disease is widespread in the tropical and subtropical regions that exist in a broad band around the equator. This includes much of sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In 2023, some 263 million cases of malaria worldwide resulted in an estimated 597,000 deaths. Around 95% of the cases and deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa. Malaria is commonly associated with poverty and has a significant negative effect on economic development; in Africa, it is estimated to result in economic losses (estimated at US$12 billion a year in 2005) due to increased healthcare costs, lost ability to work, and adverse effects on tourism. == Etymology == The term malaria originates from Medieval Italian: mala aria, 'bad air', a part of miasma theory; the disease was formerly called ague, paludism or marsh fever due to its association with swamps and marshland. The term appeared in English at least as early as 1768. The scientific study of malaria is called malariology. == Signs and symptoms == Symptoms during the early stages of malaria infection are fever, chills, headache, nausea, and vomiting and diarrhea; more serious cases may show enlarged spleen or liver, and mild jaundice. These symptoms can resemble other conditions such as sepsis, gastroenteritis, flu and other viral diseases. Without treatment, symptoms - particularly the fever - can settle into a regular pattern, recurring every two or three days (paroxysmal attacks). Symptoms typically begin 10–15 days after the initial mosquito bite, but can occur as late as several months after infection. Travellers taking preventative malaria medications may develop symptoms once they stop taking the drugs. Severe malaria occurs when the Plasmodium infection causes damage to vital organs such as the kidney, liver, lungs or brain. Symptoms include severe anemia, jaundice, convulsions, confusion, coma, kidney failure and eventually death.. Severe malaria is usually caused by P. falciparum; it should be treated as a medical emergency. === Complications === A unique feature of P falciparum is its ability to generate adhesive proteins on the surface of infected red blood cells (RBC). Infected RBCs obstruct capillaries (causing hypoxia) and accumulate in vital organs, interfering with their function. P falciparum infection underlies most severe complications of malaria. Cerebral malaria is a form of severe malaria affecting the brain. Infected RBCs blocking capillaries in the brain trigger an immune reaction, which in turn damages the blood-brain barrier. Individuals with cerebral malaria exhibit neurological symptoms, such as confusion, seizures, or coma. Cerebral malaria, if untreated, can lead to death within forty-eight hours of the first symptoms; survivors may have long-term neurological damage. Severe anemia is caused by a combination of the destruction of RBCs (both infected and uninfected) together with reduced RBC production in the bone marrow; it is a major cause of deaths in children under 5. Malaria can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome in up to 25% of cases. It is caused by damage to the capillary endothelium, in turn damaging the alveoli of the lung. Symptoms are extreme shortness of breath and a bluish tinge to the lips (cyanosis) indicating lack of oxygen. It is a leading killer of adults, with around 40% mortality once symptoms begin. Coinfection of HIV with malaria increases mortality. Other complications include an enlarged spleen, enlarged liver or both of these. So-called blackwater fever occurs when haemoglobin from lysed red blood cells leaks into and discolours the urine; this often precedes kidney failure. Malaria during pregnancy can cause stillbirths, infant mortality, miscarriage, and low birth weight, particularly in P. falciparum infection, but also with P. vivax. == Cause == Malaria is caused by infection with parasites in the genus Plasmodium, which are transmitted between the human hosts by mosquitoes in the genus Anopheles. === Life cycle === The plasmodium parasite has a complex life cycle involving human and mosquito hosts, taking a different form at each stage of the cycle. The Anopheles mosquitoes initially get infected by Plasmodium by taking a blood meal from a previously infected person. The next time the mosquito feeds, its bite introduces Plasmodium—in a mobile form called sporozoites—into a new human host. Within the human host, the sporozoites enter the bloodstream and travel to the liver, where they invade liver cells (hepatocytes). They grow and divide in the liver, with each infected hepatocyte eventually harboring up to 40,000 parasites. After 5 to 25 days the infected hepatocytes break down, releasing Plasmodium—in a smaller form called merozoites, into the bloodstream. In the blood, the merozoites rapidly invade individual red blood cells, with each replicating over 24–72 hours to form 16–32 new merozoites. The infected red blood cell bursts, releasing new merozoites which again infect red blood cells, resulting in a cycle that continuously amplifies the number of parasites in an infected person. A small portion of parasites do not replicate, but instead develop into early sexual stage parasites called male and female gametocytes. These gametocytes develop in the bone marrow for 11 days, then return to the blood circulation to await uptake by the bite of another mosquito. Once inside a mosquito, the gametocytes undergo sexual reproduction, and eventually form daughter sporozoites that migrate to the mosquito's salivary glands to be injected into a new host when the mosquito next bites. The liver infection causes no symptoms; all symptoms of malaria result from the infection of red blood cells. Symptoms develop once there are more than around 100,000 parasites per milliliter of blood. Many of the symptoms associated with severe malaria are caused by the tendency of P. falciparum to bind to blood vessel walls, resulting in damage to the affected vessels and surrounding tissue. Parasites sequestered in the blood vessels of the lung contribute to respiratory failure. In the brain, they contribute to coma. During pregnancy they accumulate in the intervillous space and hinder the function of the placenta, contributing to low birthweight and preterm labor, and increasing the risk of abortion and stillbirth. The destruction of red blood cells during infection often results in anemia, exacerbated by reduced production of new red blood cells during infection. Only female mosquitoes feed on blood; male mosquitoes feed on plant nectar and do not transmit the disease. Females of the mosquito genus Anopheles prefer to feed at night. They usually start searching for a meal at dusk, and continue through the night until they succeed. However, they may be adapting to the extensive use of bed nets and beginning to bite earlier, before bed-nets are deployed. Malaria parasites can also be transmitted by blood transfusions, although this is rare. === Plasmodium species === In humans, malaria is caused by six Plasmodium species: P. falciparum, P.