Nvidia Corporation ( en-VID-ee-ə) is an American technology company headquartered in Santa Clara, California. Founded in 1993 by Jensen Huang, Chris Malachowsky, and Curtis Priem, it develops graphics processing units (GPUs), systems on chips (SoCs), and application programming interfaces (APIs) for data science, high-performance computing, video games, and mobile and automotive applications. Nvidia has been described as a Big Tech company. Originally focused on GPUs for video gaming, Nvidia broadened their use into other markets, including artificial intelligence (AI), professional visualization, and supercomputing. The company's product lines include GeForce GPUs for gaming and creative workloads, and professional GPUs for edge computing, scientific research, and industrial applications. As of the first quarter of 2025, Nvidia held a 92% share of the discrete desktop and laptop GPU market. In the early 2000s, the company invested over a billion dollars to develop CUDA, a software platform and API that enabled GPUs to run massively parallel programs for a broad range of compute-intensive applications. As a result, as of 2025, Nvidia controlled more than 80% of the market for GPUs used in training and deploying AI models, and provided chips for over 75% of the world's TOP500 supercomputers. The company has also expanded into gaming hardware and services, with products such as the Shield Portable, Shield Tablet, and Shield TV, and operates the GeForce Now cloud gaming service. Furthermore, it has developed the Tegra line of mobile processors for smartphones, tablets, and automotive infotainment systems. In 2023, Nvidia became the seventh U.S. company to reach a US$1 trillion valuation. In 2025, driven by soaring global demand for AI data center hardware in the midst of the AI boom, Nvidia became the first company in the world to surpass US$4 trillion and US$5 trillion in market capitalization. For its strength, size and market capitalization, Nvidia has been selected as one of Bloomberg's "Magnificent Seven", the seven biggest companies on the stock market in these regards. == History == === Founding === Nvidia was founded on April 5, 1993, by Jensen Huang, a Taiwanese-American electrical engineer who was previously the director of CoreWare at LSI Logic and a microprocessor designer at AMD; Chris Malachowsky, an engineer who worked at Sun Microsystems; and Curtis Priem, who was previously a senior staff engineer and graphics chip designer at IBM and Sun Microsystems. In late 1992, the three men agreed to start the company in a meeting at a Denny's roadside diner on Berryessa Road in East San Jose. At the time, Malachowsky and Priem were frustrated with Sun's management and were looking to leave, but Huang was on "firmer ground", in that he was already running his own division at LSI. The three co-founders discussed a vision of the future which was so compelling that Huang decided to leave LSI and become the chief executive officer of their new startup. The three co-founders envisioned graphics-based processing as the best trajectory for tackling challenges that had eluded general-purpose computing methods. As Huang later explained: "We also observed that video games were simultaneously one of the most computationally challenging problems and would have incredibly high sales volume. Those two conditions don't happen very often. Video games was our killer app — a flywheel to reach large markets funding huge R&D to solve massive computational problems." The first problem was who would quit first. Huang's wife, Lori, did not want him to resign from LSI unless Malachowsky resigned from Sun at the same time, and Malachowsky's wife, Melody, felt the same way about Huang. Priem broke that deadlock by resigning first from Sun, effective December 31, 1992. According to Priem, this put pressure on Huang and Malachowsky to not leave him to "flail alone", so they gave notice too. Huang left LSI and "officially joined Priem on February 17", which was also Huang's 30th birthday, while Malachowsky left Sun in early March. In early 1993, the three founders began working together on their new startup in Priem's townhouse in Fremont, California. With $40,000 in the bank, the company was born. The company subsequently received $20 million of venture capital funding from Sequoia Capital, Sutter Hill Ventures, and others. During the late 1990s, Nvidia was one of 70 startup companies pursuing the idea that graphics acceleration for video games was the path to the future. Only two survived: Nvidia and ATI Technologies, the latter of which merged into AMD. Nvidia initially had no name. Priem's first idea was "Primal Graphics", a syllabic abbreviation of two of the founders' last names, but that left out Huang. They soon discovered it was impossible to create a workable name with syllables from all three founders' names, after considering "Huaprimal", "Prihuamal", "Malluapri", etc. The next idea came from Priem's idea for the name of Nvidia's first product. Priem originally wanted to call it the "GXNV", as in the "next version" of the GX graphics chips which he had worked on at Sun. Then Huang told Priem to "drop the GX", resulting in the name "NV". Priem made a list of words with the letters "NV" in them. At one point, Malachowsky and Priem wanted to call the company NVision, but that name was already taken by a manufacturer of toilet paper. Both Priem and Huang have taken credit for coming up with the name Nvidia, from "invidia", the Latin word for "envy". After the company outgrew Priem's townhouse, its original headquarters office was in Sunnyvale, California. === First graphics accelerator === Nvidia's first graphics accelerator, the NV1, was designed to process quadrilateral primitives (forward texture mapping), a feature that set it apart from competitors, who preferred triangle primitives. However, when Microsoft introduced the DirectX platform, it chose not to support any other graphics software and announced that its Direct3D API would exclusively support triangles. As a result, the NV1 failed to gain traction in the market. Nvidia had also entered into a partnership with Sega to supply the graphics chip for the Dreamcast console and worked on the project for about a year. However, Nvidia's technology was already lagging behind competitors. This placed the company in a difficult position: continue working on a chip that was likely doomed to fail or abandon the project, risking financial collapse. In a pivotal moment, Sega's president, Shoichiro Irimajiri, visited Huang in person to inform him that Sega had decided to choose another vendor for the Dreamcast. However, Irimajiri believed in Nvidia's potential and persuaded Sega's management to invest $5 million into the company. Huang later reflected that this funding was all that kept Nvidia afloat, and that Irimajiri's "understanding and generosity gave us six months to live". In 1996, Huang laid off more than half of Nvidia's employees—reducing headcount from 100 to 40—and focused the company's remaining resources on developing a graphics accelerator product optimized for processing triangle primitives: the RIVA 128. By the time the RIVA 128 was released in August 1997, Nvidia had only enough money left for one month's payroll. The sense of impending failure became so pervasive that it gave rise to Nvidia's unofficial company motto: "Our company is thirty days from going out of business." Huang began internal presentations to Nvidia staff with those words for many years. Nvidia sold about a million RIVA 128 units within four months, and used the revenue to fund development of its next generation of products. In 1998, the release of the RIVA TNT helped solidify Nvidia's reputation as a leader in graphics technology. === Public company === Nvidia went public on January 22, 1999. Investing in Nvidia after it had already failed to deliver on its contract turned out to be Irimajiri's best decision as Sega's president. After Irimajiri left Sega in 2000, Sega sold its Nvidia stock for $15 million. In late 1999, Nvidia released the GeForce 256 (NV10), its first product expressly marketed as a GPU, which was most notable for introducing onboard transformation and lighting (T&L) to consumer-level 3D hardware. Running at 120 MHz and featuring four-pixel pipelines, it implemented advanced video acceleration, motion compensation, and hardware sub-picture alpha blending. The GeForce outperformed existing products by a wide margin. Because its products were performing well, Nvidia won the contract to develop the graphics hardware for Microsoft’s Xbox game console, which included a $200 million advance. However, the project took many of its best engineers away from other projects. In the short term this did not matter, and the GeForce 2 GTS shipped in the summer of 2000. In December 2000, Nvidia reached an agreement to acquire the intellectual assets of its one-time rival 3dfx, a pioneer in consumer 3D graphics technology leading the field from the mid-1990s until 2000. The acquisition process was finalized in April 2002. In 2001, Standard & Poor's selected Nvidia to replace the departing Enron in the S&P 500 stock index, meaning that index funds would need to hold Nvidia shares going forward. In July 2002, Nvidia acquired Exluna for an undisclosed sum. Exluna made software-rendering tools and the personnel were merged into the Cg project.