The Yellowstone Caldera, also known as the Yellowstone Plateau Volcanic Field, is a Quaternary caldera complex and volcanic plateau spanning parts of Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana. It is driven by the Yellowstone hotspot and is largely within Yellowstone National Park. The field comprises four overlapping calderas, multiple lava domes, resurgent domes, crater lakes, and numerous bimodal lavas and tuffs of basaltic and rhyolitic composition, originally covering about 17,000 km2 (6,600 mi2). Volcanism began 2.15 million years ago and proceeded through three major volcanic cycles. Each cycle involved a large ignimbrite eruption, pyroclastic flow, continental-scale ash-fall, and caldera collapse, preceded and followed by smaller lava flows and tuffs. The first and also the largest cycle was the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff eruption about 2.08 million years ago, which formed the Island Park Caldera. The most recent supereruption, about 630,000 years ago, produced the Lava Creek Tuff and created the present Yellowstone Caldera. Post-caldera eruptions included basalt flows, rhyolite domes and flows, and minor explosive deposits, with the last magmatic eruption about 70,000 years ago. Large hydrothermal explosions also occurred during the Holocene. From 2004 to 2009, the region experienced notable uplift attributed to new magma injection. The 2005 disaster film Supervolcano, produced by the BBC and the Discovery Channel, increased public attention on the potential for a future catastrophic eruption. The Yellowstone Volcano Observatory monitors volcanic activity and does not consider an eruption imminent. Imaging of the magma reservoir indicates a substantial volume of partial melt beneath Yellowstone that is not currently eruptible. == Geologic setting == The Yellowstone Plateau Volcanic Field lies at the eastern end of the Snake River Plain and disrupts the continuity of the Laramide orogenic belt, which formed during the Late Cretaceous. From about 53 to 43 million years ago, this area experienced significant andesitic volcanism exceeding 29,000 km3 (7,000 mi3) in total volume, forming the Absaroka Volcanic Supergroup. Prominent peaks such as Mount Washburn and Eagle Peak are eroded remnants of these earlier stratovolcanoes. Before the formation of the Yellowstone Plateau, the Teton Range and Madison Range were likely structurally continuous, as were the Red Mountains and Gallatin Range. Current Yellowstone volcanism is not a continuation of Laramide tectonism or the Absaroka volcanic province. Instead, it is the most recent part of a linear age-progression of rhyolitic complexes along the Snake River Plain, extending at least 16 million years to the McDermitt caldera complex. Large rhyolitic tuff supereruptions occurred at these older eruptive centers. One is the 12.1 million-year-old Ibex Hollow Tuff from the Bruneau-Jarbidge volcanic field in southern Idaho, burying herds of Nebraska mammals under volcanic ash. Older volcanics proposed to be part of this hotspot track include the 56 million-year-old Siletzia oceanic plateau and the 70 million-year-old Carmacks Group. The cause of the northeastward progression of volcanism is debated. Some models invoke only upper-mantle processes, such as mantle pushed upward by the leading edge of the subducting Farallon plate, slab rollback, a propagating rift, or mantle convection driven by abrupt changes in thermal layer thickness at the continent–ocean boundary. A proposed lower-mantle origin suggests a fragment of the subducting Farallon slab penetrated the 660 km (410 mi) discontinuity, pushing up the lower mantle and triggering melting of water-rich transition zone beneath the western United States. Alternatively, a long-lived mantle plume rooted at the core–mantle boundary has been proposed. The plume erupted the Columbia River Basalt Group and is now feeding the Yellowstone hotspot. Seismic tomography has revealed a 350 km (220 mi) wide, cylindrical thermal anomaly extending from the deepest mantle to just beneath Yellowstone, supporting the mantle plume origin. In this model, the North American Plate moves southwest at about 2.2 cm (0.87 in) per year over the relatively stationary plume, creating the observed age-progression of eruptive centers. == Volcanic landforms == The northern and eastern extent of the first-cycle caldera are unknown due to burial, although it likely reached into the third-cycle caldera, perhaps east of the Central Plateau. The Huckleberry Ridge Tuff in the Red Mountains is interpreted as thick intracaldera fill of the Island Park Caldera, and Big Bend Ridge at the southwestern edge of the volcanic plateau is inferred to be part of its caldera wall. A fault along the Snake River and Glade Creek, bounding the northern end of Teton Range and Huckleberry Ridge, is also thought to be part of the Island Park ring-fault. It is not known whether any of the first-cycle caldera segments was resurgent. The second-cycle caldera is known as the Henry's Fork Caldera. Thurmon Ridge at the northwestern edge of the volcanic plateau is inferred to be its northern caldera wall. The fault along Big Bend Ridge was reactivated, collapsing again during the second-cycle caldera formation. Although basalt flows bury its southern and eastern boundary, a positive gravity anomaly indicates a circular caldera about 19 km (12 mi) in diameter, with its southern boundary in the middle of the Island Park basin. Robert L. Christiansen inferred that the Yellowstone Caldera is a compound caldera comprising two partially overlapping ring-fault zones, centered on the resurgent Mallard Lake dome and Sour Creek dome. The southwest boundary is unconstrained due to post-caldera rhyolite burial, but he proposed that the south flank of Purple Mountain and the Washburn Range, along with the west flank of the Absaroka Range, mark the caldera boundary on the north and east sides. Lake Butte, Flat Mountain Arm of Yellowstone Lake, north foothill of Red Mountains and Lewis Falls mark the southeast and south sides of Yellowstone caldera rim. However, the purported Sour Creek ring-fault zone and the location of the eastern caldera boundary have been challenged. More recent field mappings suggest the eastern ring-fault lies west of Sour Creek dome, closely following the Yellowstone River. The most western portion of Yellowstone Lake is the elliptical 6 km × 8 km (3.7 mi × 5.0 mi) West Thumb Basin, which includes one of the lake's deepest areas. It is interpreted as a fourth caldera, formed by a third-cycle post-caldera explosive eruption. == Eruption history == A total of 6,500 km3 (1,600 mi3) of rhyolite and 250 km3 (60 mi3) of basalt were emplaced over three volcanic cycles between about 2.15 million and 0.07 million years ago. Each cycle lasted roughly three-quarters of a million years. The sequence of events in each cycle is similar: a catastrophic rhyolitic ash-flow sheet and caldera collapse, preceded and followed by eruptions of rhyolitic lavas and tuffs and basaltic eruptions near the caldera margin. Ash-flow sheets account for more than half of the total volcanic volume of the Yellowstone Plateau. === First-cycle === The first-cycle lasted from about 2.15 million to 1.95 million years ago, spanning approximately 200 kyr. The only known pre-collapse rhyolitic unit is the Rhyolite of Snake River Butte, located just north of Ashton and dated at 2.1398±0.0035 million years, roughly 60–70 kyr before the caldera-forming Huckleberry Ridge Tuff. Its vent lies near the eventual first-cycle caldera margin close to the Big Bend Bridge. Additional rhyolite flows may have erupted along the incipient ring-fault, but the pre-collapse rhyolite history likely spans no more than ~70 kyr. Another pre-collapse unit is the 60 to 70 m (200 to 230 ft)-thick Junction Butte Basalt on the northeastern margin of the plateau, dated at 2.16±0.04 million years. The Overhanging Cliff basalt is a flow of this unit. The first-cycle caldera-forming event was the eruption of the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff at 2.0773±0.0034 million years ago, during transitional magnetic polarity. Its thickness exceeds 1 km (0.62 mi) in the Red Mountains area. The initial Plinian phase deposited up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) of fallout ash at Mount Everts before transitioning to ash-flow tuff. Early Plinian activity was intermittent, sourced from multiple vents, probably lasted a few weeks and evacuated about 50 km3 (12 mi3) of magma from four magma bodies, triggering caldera collapse at the onset of transition to ash-flow. The ash-flow tuff is a composite sheet consisted of three intermittent members, with a total magma volume of about 2,450 km3 (590 mi3). Member A likely vented from the plateau's central area and tapped nine magma bodies. After a hiatus of a few weeks or more, the most voluminous Member B erupted from north of Big Bend Ridge. After another extended break of years to decades, part of the Member A magmatic system was rejuvenated to feed Member C. The least voluminous Member C might have source area near the Red Mountains, where it is about 430 m (1,410 ft) thick. Some outcrops of Member A and Member C have been misidentified as Member B, complicating volume estimates of individual ash-flow unit. Glen A. Izett estimated that an additional 2,000 km3 (480 mi3) of ash was dispersed as fallout across North America. Tephra fallout from this event is known as the Huckleberry Ridge ash bed (formerly "Pearlette type B"). Its area covered exceeds 3,400,000 km2 (1,300,000 sq mi).