It was nine o'clock.
There was  no sun nor hind of sun, though there was not  a cloud in the sky.
It was a clear day, and yet there seemed an intangible pall over the face of
things, a subtle  gloom that made the day dark,  and  that  was  due to  the
absence of sun. This fact did  not worry the man. He was used to the lack of
sun. It had been days since he had seen the sun, and he knew that a few more
days must pass before that  cheerful orb, due  south, would just  peep above
the sky line and dip immediately from view.
     The man flung a  look  back  along the way he had come. The Yukon lay a
mile wide  and  hidden under three feet of ice. On top of this ice  were  as
many  feet of  snow.  It was  all pure white, rolling  in gentle undulations
where the ice jams of the  freeze-up had formed. North and south,  as far as
his eye could see, it was  unbroken white,  save  for a dark  hairline  that
curved and twisted from around the  spruce-covered island to the south,  and
that  curved  and twisted away into the north, where  it disappeared  behind
another  spruce-covered island. This dark hairline was  the trail---the main
trail--that  led south  five hundred  miles  to the Chilcoot Pass, Dyea, and
salt water; and that led north seventy miles  to Dawson, and still on to the
north  a  thousand miles  to Nulato, and finally to St. Michael, on  Bearing
Sea, a thousand miles and half a thousand more.
     But all this---the mysterious, far-reaching hairline trail, the absence
of sun from  the sky, the tremendous cold, and the strangeness and weirdness
of it all--made  no impression on  the  man.  It was not because he was long
used to it. He was a newcomer in the land, a "chechaquo",  and this  was his
first winter. The  trouble with him was that he  was without imagination. He
was quick and  alert in the things of life, but  only in the things, and not
in the significances. Fifty degrees below zero meant  eighty odd degrees  of
frost. Such fact impressed him as being cold and uncomfortable, and that was
all. It did  not lead him to meditate upon his frailty in general, able only
to live within certain narrow limits of heat  and cold; and from there on it
did not lead him to the conjectural field  of immortality and man's place in
the universe. Fifty degrees below zero  stood for a bite of frost that  hurt
and that  must  be guarded against by the  use  of mittens, ear  flaps, warm
moccasins,  and  thick  socks. Fifty  degrees  below  zero was  to him  just
precisely fifty degrees below zero. That there should be anything more to it
than that was a thought that never entered his head.
     As he turned to go, he spat speculatively. There was a sharp, explosive
crackle that startled him. He  spat again.  And again, in the air, before it
could  fall to the snow,  the spittle crackled. He knew  that at fifty below
spittle crackled on the  snow, but this  spittle had  crackled in  the  air.
Undoubtedly it was colder than fifty below--how much colder he did not know.
But the temperature did  not matter. He was  bound  for the old claim on the
left fork of Henderson Creek,  where the  boys  were  already. They had come
over across the divide from the  Indian Creek country, while he had come the
roundabout way to take a look at the possibility  of getting out logs in the
spring from the islands in the Yukon. He would be in to camp by six o'clock;
a  bit after dark, it ws true,  but the boys would be there, a fire would be
going, and a hot supper would be ready.  As for lunch,  he pressed  his hand
against the protruding bundle under his jacket. It was also under his shirt,
wrapped up in a handkerchief and  lying against the  naked skin.  It was the
only  way to keep the biscuits from freezing. He smiled agreeably to himself
as he thought  of those  biscuits, each cut open and sopped in bacon grease,
and each enclosing a generous slice of fried bacon.
     He  plunged in among the big spruce trees. The  trail was faint. A foot
of snow had fallen since  the last sled had passed over, and he was glad  he
was without a sled, travelling light. In fact,  he carried  nothing  but the
lunch wrapped in the handkerchief.  He was surprised, however, at the  cold.
It  certainly  was  cold, he concluded,  as  he rubbed  his  numb  nose  and
cheekbones with his mittened hand. He was a warm-whiskered man, but the hair
on his face did  not protect  the high cheekbones  and the  eager  nose that
thrust itself aggressively into the frosty air.
     At the man's heels trotted a dog, a  big  native husky, the proper wolf
dog,  gray-coated and  without  any visible or temperamental difference from
its brother, the wild wolf. The animal was depressed by the tremendous cold.
It  knew  that  it was no time for travelling. Its instinct told it  a truer
tale than was told to the man by the man's judgement. In reality, it was not
merely  colder than fifty below  zero; it was colder than sixty  below, than
seventy  below. It was seventy-five  below zero. Since the freezing point is
thirty-two above zero, it meant that one  hundred and seven degrees of frost
obtained. The dog did not know anything about thermometers.  Possibly in its
brain there was no  sharp consciousness  of a condition of very cold such as
was  in the man's  brain. But the brute had  its instinct. It experienced  a
vague but menacing apprehension that subdued it and  made it slink  along at
the  man's  heels, and that made it question eagerly every unwonted movement
of the man as if expecting him to go  into camp or to seek shelter somewhere
and  build a fire. The dog had learned fire and it wanted  fire,  or else to
burrow under the snow and cuddle its warmth away from the air
     The frozen moisture of its (i.e.  the  dog's) breathing had settled  on
its fur in  a fine  powder of frost,  and especially were its jowls, muzzle,
and eyelashes whitened by  its crystalled  breath.  The  man's red beard and
mustache were  likewise frosted,  but more solidly,  the deposit taking  the
form of  ice and increasing with every  warm, moist breath he exhaled. Also,
the man was  chewing tobacco and  the muzzle of ice held his lips so rigidly
that he was unable to clear his chin when he expelled the juice.  The result
was that a crystal beard of the color and solidity  of amber  was increasing
its length on his chin. If he fell down it would shatter itself, like glass,
into brittle  fragments.  But  he did not mind  the  appendage. It  was  the
penalty all tobacco chewers paid in that country, and he had been out before
in two  cold snaps.  they had not  been so cold as this, he knew, but by the
spirit thermometer at Sixty Mile he  knew they had registered at fifty below
and at fifty-five.
     He  held  on through the level  stretch of  woods  for  several  miles,
crossed a wide  flat of nigger heads, and dropped down a bank to the  frozen
bed of  a small  stream. This was Henderson  Creek, and  he knew he was  ten
miles  from the  forks. He looked at his  watch. It was ten  o'clock. He was
making four  miles an  hour, and he calculated that he  would arrive at  the
forks  at half-past twelve. He decided to celebrate that event by eating his
lunch there.
     The  dog  dropped  in  again  at  his  heels,  with   a  tail  drooping
discouragement, as  the man  sung along the creek bed. The furrow of the old
sled trail was plainly visible, but a dozen inches of snow covered the marks
of the last runners.  In  a  month no man  had come up or  down that  silent
creek. The man held steadily on. He was not much given to thinking, and just
then particularly he had nothing to think about save that he would eat lunch
at the  forks and  that at  six  o'clock he would be in camp  with the boys.
There was  nobody to talk to;  and, had there  been, speech would have  been
impossible  because  of  the ice  muzzle  on  his  mouth.  so  he  continued
monotonously to chew tobacco and to increase the length of his amber beard.
     Once in a whi