Tokyo can be broadly divided into the "23 special wards", "Tama region" and "Islands". This article is about the 23 special wards of Tokyo, which corresponds to what many think of as the "city of Tokyo". For information on Tokyo as a prefecture, Tama region and Islands, see Tokyo Metropolis. Tokyo (東京 Tōkyō) is the enormous and wealthy capital of Japan, and its main city, overflowing with culture, commerce, and most of all, people. As the most populated urban area in the world, Tokyo is a fascinating and dynamic metropolis that mixes foreign influences, consumer culture and global business along with remnants of the capital of old Japan. From modern electronics and gleaming skyscrapers to cherry blossoms and the Imperial Palace, this city represents the entire sweep of Japanese history and culture. Tokyo truly has something for every traveller. == Districts == The capital of Japan is not a city, but is actually Tokyo Metropolis (東京都 Tōkyō-to), which apart from the name is indistinguishable from a prefecture: it's equal in status with the other 46 prefectures, and is about as big (containing large suburban and even rural areas to the west, as well as islands as far as 1,000 km (620 mi) south). Even more strangely, there is no such thing as the "city of Tokyo". What most people, both foreigners and Japanese, are thinking of when they hear "Tokyo" is the special wards of Tokyo (特別区 tokubetsu-ku), sometimes just called the 23 wards (23区 nijūsan-ku). They're somewhat like the boroughs of London or New York, except there's no "city government" banding them together. The wards refer to themselves as "cities" in English (since they behave as such, each having its own mayor and council), but to avoid confusion, most people prefer to call them "wards". This article is about the 23 special wards, while the western suburbs and the islands are covered in Tokyo Metropolis. The geography of central Tokyo is defined by the JR Yamanote Line (see Get around). The center of Tokyo — the former area reserved for the Shogun and his samurai — lies within the loop, while the Edo-era oldtown (下町 shitamachi) is to the north and east. Sprawling around in all directions and blending in seamlessly are Yokohama, Kawasaki and Chiba, Tokyo's suburbs. Together, the entire metropolitan area has a population of over 40 million, making it the most populated urban area in the world. === Central Tokyo === === Old Tokyo (Shitamachi) === === Suburbs === == Understand == Over 500 years old, the city of Tokyo was once the modest fishing village of Edo (江戸 - literally Gate of the River) due to its location at the mouth of Sumida-gawa. The city only truly began to grow when it became the seat of the Tokugawa Shogunate in 1603, who decided to set up a new seat of power far away from the intrigues of the imperial court in Kyoto. After the Tokugawa Shogunate collapsed in the Meiji Restoration of 1868, the emperor and his court moved here from Kyoto, and the city was renamed to its current name, Tokyo, literally the "Eastern Capital". The metropolitan center of the country, Tokyo is the destination for business, education, modern culture, and government. (That's not to say that rivals such as Osaka won't dispute those claims.) === Culture === Tokyo is vast: it's best thought of not as a single city, but a constellation of cities that have grown together. Tokyo's districts vary wildly by character, from the electronic blare of Akihabara to the Imperial gardens and shrines of Chiyoda, from the hyperactive youth culture hub of Shibuya to the pottery shops and temple markets of Asakusa. If you don't like what you see, hop on the train and head to the next station, and you will find something entirely different. The sheer size and frenetic pace of Tokyo can intimidate the first-time visitor. Much of the city is a jungle of concrete and wires, with a mass of neon and blaring loudspeakers. At rush hour, crowds jostle in packed trains and masses of humanity sweep through enormous and bewilderingly complex stations. Don't get too hung up on ticking tourist sights off your list: for most visitors, the biggest part of the Tokyo experience is just wandering around at random and absorbing the vibe, poking your head into shops selling weird and wonderful things, sampling restaurants where you can't recognize a single thing on the menu (or on your plate), and finding unexpected oases of calm in the tranquil grounds of a neighbourhood Shinto shrine. It's all perfectly safe, and the locals will go to sometimes extraordinary lengths to help you if you just ask. === Expenses === The cost of living in Tokyo is not as astronomical as it once was. Deflation and market pressures have helped to make costs in Tokyo comparable to most other large cities in the developed world. Visitors from San Francisco, Los Angeles, New York, Chicago, London, Paris, Sydney, Toronto and Dublin will not find it any more expensive than back home. Rent will be significantly cheaper than big Western cities like NYC, London, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. Travelers should budget a similar amount of money for their stay in Tokyo as they would for any other great city in Europe, North America or Australia. Locals will know the bargains, but experienced cheapskates from anywhere in the world can get by with a little ingenuity. Tokyo is one of the most popular places to live in Japan. Rent for a single's apartment could range from US$500 to US$1,000 a month. Tokyo is so overwhelmingly crowded that many people live in apartments no bigger than 16 square meters (175 square feet). That being said, with excellent transportation throughout Tokyo and its outskirts, living five minutes further away from central Tokyo could mean hundreds of dollars less for living expenses each month or allow for larger housing. Many parts of Chiba, Saitama, Kanagawa, or even Ibaraki prefectures may allow the feeling of "living in Tokyo". Still, nothing compares to Tokyo itself in regards to waking up and stepping outside instantly into metropolitan life. === Climate === Tokyo is classified as lying in the humid subtropical climate zone and has five distinct seasons. Spring kicks off with plum blossoms in late February, followed by the famous cherry blossoms (sakura) in March–April. Parks, most famously Ueno, fill up with blue tarps and sozzled salarymen. Rainy season (baiu or tsuyu) in late May to June means a month of overcast skies and drizzle punctuated with downpours, with temperatures in the twenties. Summer really kicks off in July, with clear skies and brutal steam bath humidity. Daytime maximums tend to average around 31 °C (88 °F) with some days around 34 °C (93 °F) or higher, but the humidity can make those temperatures feel like 34 °C (93 °F) and 41 °C (106 °F), respectively. Overnight lows average around 25 °C (77 °F) with some nights at 27 °C (81 °F) or higher, but even those temperatures given the humidity can feel like 26 °C (79 °F) and 31 °C (88 °F). A short walk outside will leave you drenched in sweat, so this is probably the worst time of year to visit, and is best avoided if you have a choice. The one bright spot is the plethora of fireworks, most notably the epic pyrotechnic extravaganza of the Sumidagawa Fireworks Festival on the fourth Saturday in July. Sunrises occur before 04:30, and sunset is always before 19:00, save for a week in late June. Fall from September onwards means cooler temperatures and fall colors. While southern Japan is regularly battered by typhoons this time of year, they mostly (but not always) veer clear of Tokyo. Winter is usually mild, with temperatures generally ranging from 0-10 °C, though occasional cold spells can send temperatures plummeting below zero at night, and indoor heating can leave much to be desired. Snow is rare, but on those rare occasions once every few years when Tokyo is hit by a snowstorm, much of the train network grinds to a halt. Sunsets occur before 16:30 in December, and sunrise is always before 07:00. Tokyo is hotter than surrounding areas due to urban heat island effect. === Visitor information === GO>TOKYO is a well-maintained sightseeing guide site for foreigners by the government. The site includes a search page for restaurants with multi-language menus. == Talk == It's possible for English speakers to navigate their way around Tokyo without speaking any Japanese. Signs at subway and train stations include the station names in romaji (Romanized characters), and larger stations often have signs in Chinese and Korean as well. Though most people under the age of 40 have learned English in school, proficiency is generally poor, and most locals would not know more than a few basic words and phrases. Some restaurants may have English menus, but it does not necessarily mean that the staff will speak much English.