Paris, the cosmopolitan capital of France, has the reputation of being the most beautiful and romantic of all cities, brimming with historic associations and remaining vastly influential in the realms of culture, art, fashion, food and design. Dubbed the City of Light (la ville lumière) and the City of Love (la ville de l'amour), Paris is home to some of the world's finest and most luxurious fashion designers and cosmetics, such as Chanel, Christian Dior, Yves Saint-Laurent, Guerlain, Lancôme, L'Oréal, and Clarins. A large part of the city, including the banks of the River Seine, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city has the second highest number of Michelin-starred restaurants in the world (after Tokyo, which is much larger) and contains numerous iconic landmarks such as the Eiffel Tower, the Arc de Triomphe, Notre-Dame de Paris, the Louvre, the Moulin Rouge and the Basilique du Sacré-Cœur, making it one of the most popular international tourist destinations in the world, with around 14 million visitors annually. == Districts == The city of Paris is divided into 20 districts called arrondissements, numbered from 1 to 20 in a clockwise spiral from the centre of the city (which is known as Kilomètre zéro and is located at the front of Notre Dame). Arrondissements are named according to their number. You might, for example, stay in the "5th", which would be written as 5e in French. The 12th and 16th arrondissements include large parks: the Bois de Vincennes and the Bois de Boulogne respectively. The very best map you can get for Paris is called "Paris Pratique par Arrondissement" which you can buy for about €5 at any news stand. It makes navigating the city easy. The various tourist information centres and hotels in Paris also provide various city and metro maps for free and which contain all the essential details for a tourist. Each arrondissement has its own unique character and selection of attractions for the traveller: Beyond Paris, the outlying suburbs are called La Banlieue. Schematically, those to the west of Paris (Neuilly-sur-Seine, Boulogne-Billancourt, Saint Cloud, Levallois, Versailles, Poissy, Rueil-Malmaison) are wealthy residential communities, even if some more middle class suburbs can be found. Those to the north are poorer communities, and very ethnically diverse. Those to the south are a mix of rough and poor neighbourhoods alongside very affluent communities. Finally, those to the east are usually lower-middle class mingled with a few upper-middle class communities. == Understand == Paris sits on the River Seine, in north-central France. Around 2.2 million people live in the city of Paris, but this only represents the urban core within the Boulevard Périphérique. There are some 10 million people in the wider Métropole du Grand Paris (814 km2) and almost 13 million people living in the metropolitan area, making this one of Europe's largest. Due to high expectations, a tight schedule, and language barriers, not to mention the large crowds and long lines at certain attractions during high season, the city also disappoints some visitors. Foreign visitors who have an idealized view of Paris might be shocked by the typical challenges of visiting any large city. They expect romance, beauty, and luxury, but they find street crime, traffic noise, pollution, garbage, and relatively high costs. In the worst case, visitors might experience the Paris syndrome, which is a state of severe culture shock and anxiety – sometimes, severe enough that it even results in a psychiatric emergency that requires hospitalization. To enjoy the wonders of Paris, make realistic plans. The number of attractions and landmarks is overwhelming; visiting only the most famous ones (which are overcrowded during major holidays) takes more than a week. The city also has more to offer for people who take time for a calm stroll along the back streets. If your time in the city is short, be selective, and save some attractions for your next visit. Paris je t'aime. The website of the tourist office. (updated Jan 2024) SPOT24, 101 quai Jacques Chirac, Paris 15th (Metro: Bir-Hakeim (line 6); RER: Champ-de-Mars—Tour Eiffel (line C); Vélib': station 7023). Daily 10:00-18:00. The City of Paris welcome centre also has an exhibition and shop. (updated Jan 2024) === History === Paris started life as the Celto-Roman settlement of Lutetia on the Île de la Cité, the island in the Seine now occupied by the Cathédrale de Notre Dame. It takes its present name from the name of the dominant Gallo-Celtic tribe in the region, the Parisii. At least that's what the Romans called them, when they showed up in 52 BCE and established their city Lutetia on the left bank of the Seine, in what is now called the "Latin Quarter" in the 5th arrondissement. The Romans held out here for as long as anywhere else in the Western Empire, but by 508 CE they were gone, replaced by Clovis of the Franks, who is considered by the French to have been their first king. Clovis' descendants, aka the Carolingians, held onto the expanded Lutetian state for nearly 500 years through Viking raids and other calamities, which finally resulted in a forced move by most of the population back to the islands which had been the centre of the original Celtic village. The Capetian Duke of Paris was voted to succeed the last of the Carolingians as King of France, ensuring the city a premier position in the medieval world. Over the next several centuries Paris expanded onto the right bank into what was and is still called le Marais (The Marsh). Quite a few buildings from this time can be seen in the 4th arrondissement. The medieval period also witnessed the founding of the Sorbonne. As the "University of Paris", it became one of the most important centres for learning in Europe—if not the whole world, for several hundred years. Most of the institutions that still constitute the University are found in the 5th, and 13th arrondissements. In the late 18th century, there was a period of political and social upheaval in France and Europe, during which the French governmental structure, previously a monarchy with feudal privileges for the aristocracy and Catholic clergy, underwent radical change to forms based on Enlightenment principles of nationalism, citizenship, and inalienable rights. Notable events during and following the revolution were the storming of the Bastille (in what is now the 4th arrondissement), and the rise and fall of Napoleonic France. Out of the violent turmoil that was the French Revolution, sparked by the still known Passion des Français, emerged the enlightened modern day France. The Paris of today was built long after the Capetian and later the Bourbon Kings of France made their mark on Paris with the Louvre and the Palais Royal, both in the 1st. In the 19th century, Baron von Hausmann set about reconstructing the city, by adding the long straight avenues and replacing many of the then existing medieval houses, with grander and more uniform buildings. New wonders arrived during La Belle Époque, as the Parisian golden age of the late 19th century is known. Gustave Eiffel's famous tower, the first metro lines, most of the parks, and the streetlights (which are partly believed to have given the city its epithet "the city of light") all come from this period. Another source of the epithet comes from Ville Lumière, a reference not only to the revolutionary electrical lighting system implemented in the streets of Paris, but also to the prominence and aura of Enlightenment the city gained in that era. The twentieth century was hard on Paris, but thankfully not as hard as it could have been. Both world wars took a heavy toll on the city's inhabitants, but at least Hitler's order to burn the city was ignored by the German General von Choltitz, who was quite possibly convinced by a Swedish diplomat that it would be better to surrender and be remembered as the saviour of Paris, rather than its destroyer. Following the war, the city recovered quickly at first, but slowed in the 1970s and 1980s when Paris began to experience some of the problems faced by big cities everywhere: pollution, housing shortages, and occasionally failed experiments in urban renewal. However, post-war Paris enjoyed considerable growth as a multi-cultural city, with new immigrants from all corners of the world, especially La Francophonie, including most of northern and western Africa as well as Indochina. These immigrants brought their foods and music, both of which are of prime interest for many travellers. Immigration and multi-culturalism continues in the 21st century with a marked increase in the arrival of people from Latin America, especially Mexico, Colombia, and Brazil. In the late 1990s, it was hard to find good Mexican food in Paris, whereas today there are dozens of possibilities from lowly taquerias in the outer arrondissements to nice sit-down restaurants on the boulevards.