CRISPR gene editing (; pronounced like "crisper"; an abbreviation for "clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats") is a genetic engineering technique in molecular biology by which the genomes of living organisms may be modified. It is based on a simplified version of the bacterial CRISPR-Cas9 antiviral defense system. By delivering the Cas9 nuclease complexed with a synthetic guide RNA (gRNA) into a cell, the cell's genome can be cut at a desired location, allowing existing genes to be removed or new ones added in vivo("within the living"). The technique is considered highly significant in biotechnology and medicine as it enables in vivo genome editing and is considered exceptionally precise, cost-effective, and efficient. It can be used in the creation of new medicines, agricultural products, and genetically modified organisms, or as a means of controlling pathogens and pests. It also offers potential in the treatment of inherited genetic diseases as well as diseases arising from somatic mutations, such as cancer. However, its use in human germline genetic modification is highly controversial. The development of this technique earned Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2020. The third researcher group that shared the Kavli Prize for the same discovery, led by Virginijus Šikšnys, was not awarded the Nobel Prize. Working like genetic scissors, the Cas9 nuclease opens both strands of the targeted DNA sequence to introduce the modification by one of two methods. Knock-in mutations, facilitated via homology-directed repair (HDR), are the traditional pathway of targeted genomic editing approaches. This allows for the introduction of targeted DNA damage and repair. HDR employs the use of similar DNA sequences to drive the repair of the break via the incorporation of exogenous DNA to function as the repair template. This method relies on the periodic and isolated occurrence of DNA damage at the target site in order for the repair to commence. Knock-out mutations caused by CRISPR-Cas9 result from the repair of the double-stranded break by means of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or POLQ/polymerase theta-mediated end-joining (TMEJ). These end-joining pathways can often result in random deletions or insertions at the repair site, which may disrupt or alter gene functionality. Therefore, genomic engineering with CRISPR-Cas9 enables researchers to generate targeted random gene disruption. While genome editing in eukaryotic cells has been possible using various methods since the 1980s, the methods employed have proven to be inefficient and impractical for large-scale implementation. With the discovery of CRISPR and specifically the Cas9 nuclease molecule, efficient and highly selective editing became possible. Cas9, derived from the bacterial species Streptococcus pyogenes, has facilitated targeted genomic modification in eukaryotic cells by enabling a reliable method of creating a targeted break at a specific location as designated by the crRNA and tracrRNA guide strands. Researchers can insert Cas9 and template RNA with ease in order to silence or cause point mutations at specific loci. This has proven invaluable for quick and efficient mapping of genomic models and biological processes associated with various genes in a variety of eukaryotes. Newly engineered variants of the Cas9 nuclease that significantly reduce off-target activity have been developed. CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing techniques have many potential applications. The use of the CRISPR-Cas9-gRNA complex for genome editing was the AAAS's choice for Breakthrough of the Year in 2015. Since 2015, CRISPR has been experimentally investigated on non-viable human embryos. In 2019, the first humans were born from genome-edited embryos using the CRISPR technique, as a result of the controversial He Jiankui affair. Several bioethical concerns have been raised about the prospect of using CRISPR for germline editing, especially the potential enabling of human eugenics. In 2023, the first drug making use of CRISPR gene editing, Exagamglogene autotemcel, sold under the brand name "Casgevy", was officially approved for use in the United Kingdom, to cure sickle-cell disease and beta thalassemia. On 2 December 2023, the Kingdom of Bahrain became the second country in the world to approve the use of Casgevy to treat sickle-cell anemia and beta thalassemia. On December 8, 2023, Casgevy received approval for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration. == History == === Other methods === In the early 2000s, German researchers began developing zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), synthetic proteins whose DNA-binding domains enable them to create double-stranded breaks in DNA at specific points. ZFNs have a higher precision and the advantage of being smaller than Cas9, but ZFNs are not as commonly used as CRISPR-based methods. In 2010, synthetic nucleases called transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) provided an easier way to target a double-stranded break to a specific location on the DNA strand. Both zinc finger nucleases and TALENs require the design and creation of a custom protein for each targeted DNA sequence, which is a much more difficult and time-consuming process than that of designing guide RNAs. CRISPRs are much easier to design because the process requires synthesizing only a short RNA sequence, a procedure that is already widely used for many other molecular biology techniques (e.g., creating oligonucleotide primers). Whereas methods such as RNA interference (RNAi) do not fully suppress gene function, CRISPR, ZFNs, and TALENs provide full, irreversible gene knockout. CRISPR can also target several DNA sites simultaneously simply by introducing different gRNAs. In addition, the costs of employing CRISPR are relatively low. === Discovery === In 2005, Alexander Bolotin at the French National Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA) discovered a CRISPR locus that contained novel Cas genes, significantly one that encoded a large protein known as Cas9. In 2006, Eugene Koonin at the US National Center for Biotechnology Information, NCBI, proposed an explanation as to how CRISPR cascades as a bacterial immune system. In 2007, Philippe Horvath at Danisco France SAS displayed experimentally how CRISPR systems are an adaptive immune system, and integrate new phage DNA into the CRISPR array, which is how they fight off the next wave of attacking phage. In 2012, the research team, led by professor Jennifer Doudna (University of California, Berkeley) and professor Emmanuelle Charpentier (Umeå University), was the first group of individuals to identify, disclose, and file a patent application for the CRISPR-Cas9 system needed to edit DNA. They also published their finding that CRISPR-Cas9 could be programmed with RNA to edit genomic DNA, now considered one of the most significant discoveries in the history of biology. === Patents and commercialization === As of November 2013, SAGE Labs (part of Horizon Discovery group) had exclusive rights from one of those companies to produce and sell genetically engineered rats and non-exclusive rights for mouse and rabbit models. By 2015, Thermo Fisher Scientific had licensed intellectual property from ToolGen to develop CRISPR reagent kits. As of December 2014, patent rights to CRISPR were contested. Several companies were formed to develop related drugs and research tools. As companies ramped up financing, doubts as to whether CRISPR could be quickly monetized were raised. In 2014, Feng Zhang of the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and nine others were awarded US patent number 8,697,359 over the use of CRISPR–Cas9 gene editing in eukaryotes. Although Charpentier and Doudna (referred to as CVC) were credited for the conception of CRISPR, the Broad Institute was the first to achieve a "reduction to practice" according to patent judges Sally Gardner Lane, James T. Moore, and Deborah Katz. The first set of patents was awarded to the Broad team in 2015, prompting attorneys for the CVC group to request the first interference proceeding. In February 2017, the US Patent Office ruled on a patent interference case brought by the University of California with respect to patents issued to the Broad Institute, and found that the Broad patents, with claims covering the application of CRISPR-Cas9 in eukaryotic cells, were distinct from the inventions claimed by the University of California. Shortly after, the University of California filed an appeal of this ruling. In 2019, the second interference dispute was opened. This was in response to patent applications made by CVC that required the appeals board to determine the original inventor of the technology. The USPTO ruled in March 2022 against UC, stating that the Broad Institute was first to file. The decision affected many of the licensing agreements for the CRISPR editing technology that was licensed from UC Berkeley. UC stated its intent to appeal the USPTO's ruling. === Recent events === In March 2017, the European Patent Office (EPO) announced its intention to allow claims for editing all types of cells to the Max-Planck Institute in Berlin, the University of California, and the University of Vienna, and in August 2017, the EPO announced its intention to allow CRISPR claims in a patent application that MilliporeSigma had filed. As of August 2017, the patent situation in Europe was complex, with MilliporeSigma, ToolGen, Vilnius University, and Harvard contending for claims, along with the University of California and Broad.