The Byzantine Empire, also known as the Eastern Roman Empire, was the continuation of the Roman Empire centred on Constantinople during late antiquity and the Middle Ages. Having survived the events that caused the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century AD, it endured until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453. The term 'Byzantine Empire' was coined only after its demise; its citizens used the term 'Roman Empire' and called themselves 'Romans'. During the early centuries of the Roman Empire, the western provinces were Latinised, but the eastern parts kept their Hellenistic culture. Constantine I (r. 324–337) legalised Christianity and moved the capital to Constantinople. Theodosius I (r. 379–395) made Christianity the state religion and Greek gradually replaced Latin for official use. The empire adopted a defensive strategy and, throughout its remaining history, experienced recurring cycles of decline and recovery. The Byzantine Empire reached its greatest extent under the reign of Justinian I (r. 527–565), who briefly reconquered much of Italy and the western Mediterranean coast. A plague began around 541, and a prolonged warfare with Persia placed fiscal and military strain on the empire, contributing to political and strategic challenges in the decades that followed. In the 630s and 640s the Arab conquests defeated Byzantine field armies in Syria and Egypt, resulting in the permanent loss of those provinces to the Rashidun Caliphate. In 698, Africa was lost to the Umayyad Caliphate, but the empire stabilised under the Isaurian dynasty. It expanded once more under the Macedonian dynasty, experiencing a two-century-long renaissance. Thereafter, periods of civil war and Seljuk incursion resulted in the loss of most of Asia Minor. The empire recovered during the Komnenian restoration, and Constantinople remained the largest and wealthiest city in Europe until the 13th century. The empire was largely dismantled in 1204, following the sack of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade; its former territories were then divided into competing Greek rump states and Latin realms. Despite the eventual recovery of Constantinople in 1261, the reconstituted empire wielded only regional power during its final two centuries. Its remaining territories were progressively annexed by the Ottomans in a series of wars fought in the 14th and 15th centuries. The fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453 brought the empire to an end. Nomenclature The empire's inhabitants, generally known as Byzantines, regarded themselves as Romans (in Greek, Ῥωμαῖοι or Romaioi). Similarly, their Islamic contemporaries called their empire the "land of the Romans" (Bilād al-Rūm). After 800 AD, Western Europe called them "Greeks" (Graeci), as the Papacy and medieval German emperors regarded themselves as the true inheritors of Roman identity. The adjective "Byzantine", derived from Byzantion (Byzantium in Latin), the name of the Greek settlement Constantinople was established on, was only used to describe the inhabitants of the city; it did not refer to the empire, called Rhomanía (Ῥωμανία or "Romanland") by its citizens. Following the empire's fall, early modern scholars referred to it by many names, including the "Eastern Empire", the "Low Empire", the "Late Empire", the "Empire of the Greeks", "Empire of Constantinople", and "Roman Empire". The increasing use of "Byzantine" and "Byzantine Empire" may have started with Theodore Metochites or Laonikos Chalkokondyles whose work was widely propagated by Hieronymus Wolf. "Byzantine" was used adjectivally alongside terms such as "Empire of the Greeks" until the 19th century. It is now the primary term, used to refer to all aspects of the empire; a minority of modern historians believe it should not be used because it was originally a prejudicial and inaccurate term. History Start date Given the significant overlap in historiographical periodisations of "Late Roman history", "late antiquity", and "Byzantine history", there is no consensus on a foundation date for the Byzantine Empire. Scholarship with links to Greece or Eastern Orthodoxy has customarily placed it in the early 300s. The growth of the study of "late antiquity" has led to some historians setting a start date in the seventh or eighth centuries. Others believe a "new empire" began during changes c. 300 AD. Geoffrey Greatrex believes that it is impossible to precisely date the foundation of the Byzantine Empire. Pre-518: Constantinian, Theodosian, and Leonid dynasties Between the 3rd and 1st centuries BC, the Roman Republic established hegemony over the eastern Mediterranean, while its government developed into the one-person rule of an emperor. The Roman Empire enjoyed a period of relative stability until the 3rd century AD, when external threats and internal crises caused it to splinter, as regional armies acclaimed their generals as "soldier-emperors". One of these, Diocletian (r. 284–305), recognised that the state was too big to be ruled by a single person. He instituted the Tetrarchy, a system which divided the empire into eastern and western halves. The Tetrarchy quickly failed, but the division of the empire proved an enduring concept. Constantine I (r. 306–337) secured absolute power in 324. Over the next six years, he rebuilt the city of Byzantium as a new capital that he called "New Rome" (later named Constantinople). The old capital Rome was farther from the prosperous eastern provinces and in a less strategically important location; it was not esteemed by the "soldier-emperors", who ruled from the frontiers, or by the empire's population. Having been granted citizenship, they considered themselves just as Roman as those in the city of Rome. He continued reforms of the empire's military and civil administration and instituted the gold solidus as a stable currency. He favoured Christianity and became an opponent of paganism. Constantine's dynasty prioritised a lengthy conflict against the comparably powerful Sasanid Persia and ended in 363 with the death of his nephew Julian. The reign of the short Valentinianic dynasty, marked by wars against the Goths, religious debates, and anti-corruption campaigns, ended in the East with the death of Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. Valens's successor, Theodosius I (r. 379–395), secured peace in the east by allowing the Goths to settle in Roman territory; he also twice intervened in the western half, defeating the usurpers Magnus Maximus and Eugenius in 388 and 394, respectively. He actively condemned paganism, confirmed the primacy of Nicene Orthodoxy over Arianism in the East, and established Christianity as the Roman state religion. He was the last emperor to rule both the western and eastern halves of the empire. After his death, the West was destabilised but the East thrived due to the civilian administrators who continued to hold power. Theodosius II (r. 408–450) largely left the rule of the East to officials such as Anthemius, who constructed the Theodosian Walls. Constantinople had now entrenched itself as the empire's capital. Aside from Constantinople's walls, Theodosius' reign was also marked by the compilation of the Codex Theodosianus and the theological dispute over Nestorianism (a doctrine later deemed heretical). His reign also saw the arrival of Attila's Huns, who ravaged the Balkans, leading to a large tribute being exacted from the eastern empire. Attila switched his attention to the rapidly-deteriorating western empire, and his people fractured after his death in 453. Later, Leo I (r. 457–474) failed in his 468 attempt to reconquer the West. The warlord Odoacer deposed Romulus Augustulus in 476 and after the assassination of his titular successor Julius Nepos in 480, abolished the office of western emperor. Through a combination of fortune and good political decisions, the Eastern Empire never experienced rebellious barbarian vassals or rule by barbarian warlords—the problems which ensured the downfall of the West. Zeno (r. 474–491) convinced the problematic Ostrogoth king Theodoric to take control of Italy from Odoacer; dying when the empire was at peace, he was succeeded by Anastasius I (r. 491–518). His belief in monophysitism brought occasional issues, but Anastasius was a capable administrator and instituted successful financial reforms including the abolition of the chrysargyron tax. He was the first emperor since Diocletian not to face any serious problems affecting the empire during his reign. 518–717: Justinian and Heraclian dynasties The reign of Justinian I was a high point in east Roman history. Following his accession in 527, the legal code was rewritten as the Corpus Juris Civilis, which streamlined Roman law across the empire; he reasserted imperial control over religion and morality through purges of pagans, heretics, and other "deviants"; and having ruthlessly subdued the 532 Nika revolt he rebuilt much of Constantinople, including the Hagia Sophia. Justinian I took advantage of the confusion, following Theoderic the Ostrogoth's death, to attempt the reconquest of Italy. The Vandal Kingdom in North Africa was subjugated in late 533 by the general Belisarius, who then invaded Italy; the Ostrogothic Kingdom mostly ended in 554. In the 540s, Justinian began to suffer reversals on multiple fronts. Capitalising on Constantinople's preoccupation with the West, Khosrow I of the Sasanian Empire invaded Byzantine territory and sacked Antioch in 540. A devastating plague killed a large proportion of the population and severely reduced the empire's social and financial stability. The most difficult period of the Ostrogothic war, against their king Totila, came during