A landscape analysis of psychedelic retreat organizations advertising online Logan Neitzke-Spruill, Caroline S. Beit, Jill Oliver Robinson (2025-05-02) Research into psychedelics’ clinical potential has corresponded to a growth in public interest and adult use. One common pathway to accessing psychedelics is through psychedelic retreats. While individual retreats have been characterized in the anthropological literature, no systematic evaluation of the psychedelic retreat industry exists. Assessing the characteristics of the psychedelic retreat industry is critical to understanding the associated ethical, legal, and social implications and ensuring consumer safety. To this end, we conducted a landscape analysis of online, publicly available information to capture and characterize a broad range of organizations offering psychedelic retreats and marketing to English-speaking consumers. From July 2023 to December 2023, we identified 298 psychedelic retreat organizations. Some identified as religious organizations, but the majority focused on general wellness. Organizations offered various psychedelic substances with ayahuasca being the most common, followed by psilocybin and San Pedro. Organizations held retreats across the globe at various price points. In total, there were 440 distinct physical locations where retreat experiences were held; 130 were inside the United States (U.S.) and 310 were outside the U.S. Further research into the practices of psychedelic retreat organizations is recommended to help reduce harm and support consumer education. --- Market share and recent hiring trends in anthropology faculty positions Robert J. Speakman, Carla S. Hadden, Matthew H. Colvin (2018-09-12) Between 1985 and 2014, the number of US doctoral graduates in Anthropology increased from about 350 to 530 graduates per year. This rise in doctorates entering the work force along with an overall decrease in the numbers of tenure-track academic positions has resulted in highly competitive academic job market. We estimate that approximately79% of US anthropology doctorates do not obtain tenure-track positions at BA/BS, MA/MS, and PhD institutions in the US. Here, we examine where US anthropology faculty obtained their degrees and where they ultimately end up teaching as tenure-track faculty. Using data derived from the 2014–2015 AnthroGuide and anthropology departmental web pages, we identify and rank PhD programs in terms of numbers of graduates who have obtained tenure-track academic jobs; examine long-term and ongoing trends in the programs producing doctorates for the discipline as a whole, as well as for the subfields of archaeology, bioanthropology, and sociocultural anthropology; and discuss gender inequity in academic anthropology within the US. --- Understanding ethnic inequalities in mental healthcare in the UK: A meta-ethnography Narinder Bansal, Saffron Karlsen, Sashi P. Sashidharan (2022-12-13) Background: Evidence regarding the presence and persistence of ethnic inequalities in mental healthcare is well established. The reasons for these inequalities and lack of progress in diminishing them are less understood. This meta-ethnography aims to provide a new conceptual understanding of how ethnic inequalities are created and sustained; this is essential to develop effective interventions. Specifically, we sought to understand why people from ethnic minority groups are underrepresented in primary care mental health service provision and overrepresented in crisis pathways and detention. Methods and findings: Following eMERGe guidelines for meta-ethnographies, we searched OpenGrey, Kings Fund, CINAHL, Medline, PsycINFO, and Social Care Online databases for qualitative articles published from database inception until October 2, 2022, using broad categories of search terms relating to “ethnicity AND (mental illness/mental health/emotional distress) AND (help-seeking/service utilisation/experience/perception/view).” We included all conceptually rich articles that used qualitative methods of data collection and analysis and excluded non-UK studies and those that focused solely on causation of mental illness. Our patient, public, and practitioner lived experience advisory group provided feedback and input on key stages of the project including search terms, research questions, data analysis, and dissemination. A total of 14,142 articles were identified; 66 met the inclusion criteria. We used reciprocal, refutational, and line of argument analytical approaches to identify convergence and divergence between studies. The synthesis showed that current models of statutory mental healthcare are experienced as a major barrier to the delivery of person-centred care to those in ethnic minority groups due to the perceived dominance of monocultural and reductionist frameworks of assessment and treatment (described as “medical” and “Eurocentric”) and direct experiences of racist practice. The lack of socially oriented and holistic frameworks of knowledge and understanding in medical training and services is experienced as epistemic injustice, particularly among those who attribute their mental illness to experiences of migration, systemic racism, and complex trauma. Fear of harm, concerns about treatment suitability, and negative experiences with health providers such as racist care and medical neglect/injury contribute to avoidance of, and disengagement from, mainstream healthcare. The lack of progress in tackling ethnic inequalities is attributed to failures in coproduction and insufficient adoption of existing recommendations within services. Study limitations include insufficient recording of participant characteristics relating to generational status and social class in primary studies, which prevented exploration of these intersections. Conclusions: In this study, we found that the delivery of safe and equitable person-centred care requires a model of mental health that is responsive to the lived experiences of people in ethnic minority groups. For the people considered in this review, this requires better alignment of mental health services with social and anti-racist models of care. Our findings suggest that intersections related to experiences of racism, migration, religion, and complex trauma might be more relevant than crude ethnic group classifications. Strategies to tackle ethnic inequalities in mental healthcare require an evaluation of individual, systemic, and structural obstacles to authentic and meaningful coproduction and implementation of existing community recommendations in services. In a meta-ethnography, Dr Narinder Bansal and colleagues report insights into ethnic inequalities in mental healthcare in the UK. Why was this study done?: What did the researchers do and find?: What do these findings mean?: --- Testing the taxonomy of Dmanisi hominin fossils through dental crown area Victor Nery, Walter Neves, Leticia Valota (2025-12-03) The Dmanisi paleoanthropological assemblage from Georgia is among the most debated collections of hominin fossils due to its early age and extreme morphological diversity relative to other Homo assemblages. This variability has been interpreted as a result of sexual dimorphism in the Homo erectus clade, in which Dmanisi hominins were traditionally classified. However, this hypothesis has been challenged by the proposal that the Dmanisi fossils represent more than one Homo species. Taxonomic assessments of the Pleistocene Georgian hominins have focused primarily on craniometric analyses, with fewer studies addressing dental morphology through metric approaches. Considering the value of dental crown area in reconstructing evolutionary relationships, a comparative sample of fossil hominins, consisting of 51 maxillary and 71 mandibular specimens (583 teeth in total), was analyzed using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) to evaluate the diversity in the Dmanisi fossil assemblage. Morphological affinities were examined visually through the first two discriminant functions, and taxonomic relationships were tested via classification analyses based on posterior probabilities. The analyses show a strong association of the D4500-D2600 specimen with australopiths, and of the D2282-D211 and D2700-D2735 specimens with Homo species. The sexual dimorphism hypothesis was tested by comparing the ratios of mandibular postcanine dentition of Dmanisi specimens with male and female gorillas and chimpanzees, which suggests that dental crown area of the Pleistocene Georgian hominins could be the product of sexual dimorphism only if they came from species with similar levels of dimorphism than these great apes. We conclude that differences in crown dimensions support the hypothesis of two distinct taxa coexistent at the Dmanisi site, previously proposed to be Homo georgicus and Homo caucasi. This proposal has important implications for the dispersal of Homo out of Africa at the beginning of Pleistocene.