Navigating work, family, and society: Challenges facing Jordanian female journalists Hana Al-Souob, Enas A Assaf (2026-03-02) The aim of this study is to explore the challenges encountered by Jordanian female journalists, focusing on their experiences in the journalistic work environment (including the workplace and the field) in addition to the challenges faced from society and family. Through using a qualitative and inductive approach by conducting in-depth interviews with Jordanian female journalists who are registered professionals working in a variety of media environments, including daily, weekly, and electronic media. The research findings explore a wide range of challenges female journalists face in Jordan, including workplace issues and external challenges from family and society. The following main themes were emerged in the study, at the workplace level: harassment and newsroom safety; pay inequalities, organizational culture and leadership this point leads to subthemes as bullying, framing female Journalists, and stigmatization, On the other hands challenges themes found at the level of the society and family security which emerged several subthemes as party affiliation, security harassment, and cultural beliefs, as well as family, parents and relatives perspectives. The findings highlight persistent gender‑based discrimination shaped by workplace practices and cultural expectations. Strengthening protections, ensuring fair pay and promotion, and shifting societal attitudes are essential to supporting female journalists. Further research is needed to better understand these challenges and inform effective solutions. --- How do US corporations communicate interculturally with their Chinese stakeholders: Analysis of GM Company’s social media posts from the cultural value perspective Jin Xu, Ruijun Duan (2023-10-05) Social Media is an important means of communication with audiences around the world. The purpose of this study was to explore whether GM—a famous US auto company adapts its US Cultural values to suit the prevalent cultural values of its Chinese stakeholders on Chinese social media. Content analysis was used to evaluate the cultural content of GM Company’s posts on Weibo and Twitter. Although influenced by the special features of the car industry, there is still enough evidence that the communication style of the US auto Company makes cultural adaption on Chinese social media, reflecting more Chinese prevalent cultural values. --- The State of Social Media Policies in Higher Education Jeffrey Pomerantz, Carolyn Hank, Cassidy R. Sugimoto (2015-05-27) This paper presents an analysis of the current state of development of social media policies at institution of higher education. Content analysis of social media policies for all institutions listed in the Carnegie Classification Data File revealed that less than one-quarter of institutions had an accessible social media policy. Analysis was done by institution and campus unit, finding that social media policies were most likely to appear at doctorate-granting institutions and health, athletics, and library units. Policies required that those affiliated with the institution post appropriate content, represent the unit appropriately, and moderate conversations with coworkers and external agencies. This analysis may inform the development and revision of social media policies across the field of higher education, taking into consideration the rapidly changing landscape of social media, issues of academic freedom, and notions of interoperability with policies at the unit and campus levels. --- ‘Forgetting’ or ‘Precipitation’: Literary inquisition in Qing Dynasty and modern enterprise risk preference Weizhou Wang, Weihua Yu, Jinfei Niu (2024-03-22) This paper takes the risk preference of modern listed companies as the research object, uses the financial data of Chinese listed companies combined with the literary inquisition file in Qing Dynasty to conduct an empirical study, and examines the influence of literary inquisition on the risk preference of modern corporate CEOs in Qing Dynasty. The study found that the literary inquisition incident in Qing Dynasty significantly affected and reduced the risk preference of modern enterprises. The competitive hypothesis of the influence of Confucian culture and China City Commercial Credit Environment Index (CEI) on CEOs’ risk preference is excluded. In addition, through the study of heterogeneity, this paper also verifies that the influence of literary inquisition is more significant in areas with a higher degree of marketization, indicating that the influence of informal institutions depends on the establishment of formal institutions. Finally, in the mechanism study, this paper points out that the rulers’ suppression of ideas will change long-term social capital and lead to the decrease of general trust in society, which will make the enterprise managers born in the region tend to be conservative in their risk preference. --- Debating stereotypes: Online reactions to the vice-presidential debate of 2020 Diane H. Felmlee, Chris Julien, Sara C. Francisco (2023-01-25) The 2020 Vice-Presidential debate afforded the opportunity to examine online reactions toward a woman of color, Kamala Harris, and a white man, Mike Pence, as they vied for the same position. We collected tweets from the Twitter API related to Harris and Pence, mainly using neutral hashtags. We examined keywords for gender and race slurs and conducted a multivariate analysis of tweet sentiment. Gender and racial slurs surface in both Harris and Pence datasets, showcasing the insidious nature of sexist and racist stereotypes that seep into online conversations regarding a high-status job debate. As anticipated, tweets regarding Harris contained a higher proportion of racist and sexist curse words, highlighting greater levels of harassment and “intersectional,” multi-ethnic/gender attacks. Racial insults targeting Blacks or Asians were more negative than those associated with Whites. Unexpectedly, tweets related to Harris were more positive in average sentiment than those regarding Pence. Yet, there were significantly more retweets, and more negativity of retweets, relating to Harris than to Pence, underscoring the relatively widespread broadcasting of derogatory messages about Harris. Overall, we found that harassing messages toward the candidates reinforced traditional race and gender stereotypes and bolstered the status of those who posted negative content by attaining more retweets. Harassers routinely invoked well-worn, stereotypical insults in their attacks, especially when targeting a multiracial woman.